---
layout: post
title:  "Does formal education do justice?"
excerpt: "Did your school and college prepare you for your future life in the real world?"
summary: "Our discussion today is if the schools and colleges prepare the students for a life in the world."
episode: "001"
audio: http://cdn.writerandgeek.com/media/01%20-%20Education-min.mp3
duration: "25:51"
length: "16462643.2"
explicit: "no"
block: "no"
banner: http://res.cloudinary.com/writerandgeek/image/upload/v1493401533/education.png
author: "Writer & Geek"
date:   2017-04-15 11:05:00
categories: Regular
comments: true
---

### Key Takaways
- **Experiences over Academics**: School and colleges teach you more about real life experiences than about academics.
- **Subjects don't matter (that much)**: The subjects you learn during your academical years don't matter much. If you have passion and interest, you can make a living in the field of your intrest.
- **Hands on better than theory**: Always focus on getting experince, do practical work. This is worth more than a degree.
- **Learn soft skills**: Where technical skills are essencial to master your trade, soft skills like _communication_, _personal finance_, _ettiquette_ etc. are also essencial ingredients for a successful life and career.

---

**[00:00]** - Intro.

**[00:40]** - Vishnu's college experience.

**[02:00]** - Shankar's college experience.

---

A child is sent to school. What happens? Something changes. Something moulds the child to be like many thousands of kids around him.

- Before school, a child is free to do what it wants. A school teaches it to answer questions and not ask questions. For everything there is a framework in the school. We learn theories and are polished to be the way society expects us to be. The curriculum is set up in a way that the kids don't get to choose what they want. Children are ranked according to their grades in a fixed set of subjects. Not everyone might be good at science and mathematics. Some are better in singing and playing musical instruments. But they aren't encouraged in the same way other subjects are. The result is, years of conditioning and students end up being listeners and followers and not creators and leaders. Had the creativity been identified at the nascent stage, it would've done much make the student and expert by the time he leaves high school.

Image: [Pixabay](https://pixabay.com/en/books-icon-book-icon-symbol-set-1673578/){:target="blank"}